#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title /dev/dim/misc/dalidoc
#date 20110704
#desc Tapoueh.org Inc. Projects

* dalidoc

Suppose you want to obtain really nice booklets, for printing (A4 material)
and handing over to customers. You want this task to be as easy as possible:
what should be taking your precious time is writing up the content, not
fiddling against some kind of *strange* =WYSIWYG= tool suite.

You also want all the documents to look alike, the art you're using (company
logos etc) to be easy to upgrade, you want nice cover page, and you of
course want to be able to have the *sources* of those documents checked in
your prefered control revision system.

So you want to edit plain text with some kind of syntactic sugar to express
the document structure, the semantic of it. And you want to be able to deal
with representation from time to time, but this is the exception.

We choosed to use [[http://docutils.sf.net/][Restructured Text]] as the input format. The standard tool
suite offers =HTML= and =LaTeX= publishing, amonst others, and I made some glue
code to have *templates* and support for [[http://tug.org/PSTricks/main.cgi/][PSTricks]] to produce the cover page.

The project is called [[http://pgsql.tapoueh.org/dalidoc/][dalidoc]] because of the name of a company I helped
start (and have been co-owner of for almost two years). I don't even know if
the guys over there still use this solution, which was nicely baking by the
last copy I have, version =0.4.6=.

Nicely baking meaning this prototype was working good enough for us to use
it on a day to day basis, not wanted to consider switching from
it. Ever. Meaning alse that the implementation of the project by version
=0.4.6= is needing a serious rewrite to accept future challanges.

But the project stalled there, as far as I know.

