#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title  See you in Amsterdam
#date   20111004-14:25
#tags   PostgreSQL Conferences Extensions

The next [[http://2011.pgconf.eu/][PostgreSQL conference]] is approaching very fast now, I hope you have
your ticket already: it's a very promissing event!  If you want some help in
deciding whether to register or not, just have another look at [[http://www.postgresql.eu/events/schedule/pgconfeu2011/][the schedule]].
Pick the talks you want to see.  It's hard, given how packed with good ones
the schedule is.  When you're mind is all set, review the list.  Registered?

I'll be presenting another talk about extensions, but this time I've geared
up to use cases, with [[http://www.postgresql.eu/events/schedule/pgconfeu2011/session/138-extensions-are-good-for-business-logic/][Extensions are good for business logic]].  The idea is
not to talk about how to make PostgreSQL play fair with extensions including
at *dump* and *restore* times, that's already done and I've been talking only
too much about it.  The idea this time is to figure out how much you get
from this feature.

If you ever felt like something is missing in your processes between pushing
rollouts in devel environments and refining them as developers are testing
and preparing something for the live databases, then we have something for
you here.  Including how to easily compare state between production and
development, but without having to guess or reverse engineer anything.

Yeah, extensions are all about getting even more professional!  A great tool
you'll be happy to master!

And now I need to prepare a damn good slide deck, right?  See you there! :)
