#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title  Emacs Kicker
#date   20110415-21:30
#tags   Emacs debian el-get switch-window emacs-kicker

* Emacs Kicker

Following up on the very popular [[https://github.com/technomancy/emacs-starter-kit][emacs-starter-kit]], I'm now proposing the
[[https://github.com/dimitri/emacs-kicker][emacs-kicker]].  It's about the =.emacs= file you've seen in older posts here,
which I maintain for some colleagues.  After all, if they find it useful,
some more people might to, so I've decided to publish it.

What you'll find is a very simple =128= lines [[http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/][Emacs]] user init file, based on
[[https://github.com/dimitri/el-get][el-get]] for external packages.  A not so *random* selection of those is used,
here's the list when you hide some details:

<src lang="emacs-lisp">
 '(el-get			; el-get is self-hosting
   escreen            		; screen for emacs, C-\ C-h
   php-mode-improved		; if you're into php...
   psvn				; M-x svn-status
   switch-window		; takes over C-x o
   auto-complete		; complete as you type with overlays
   emacs-goodies-el		; the debian addons for emacs
   yasnippet			; powerful snippet mode
   zencoding-mode		; http://www.emacswiki.org/emacs/ZenCoding
   (:name buffer-move		; move buffers around in windows
   (:name smex			; a better (ido like) M-x
   (:name magit			; git meet emacs, and a binding
   (:name goto-last-change	; move pointer back to last change
</src>

Another interresting thing to note in this =kicker= is a choice of some key
bindings that are rather unusual (yet) I guess.

<src lang="emacs-lisp">
(global-set-key (kbd "C-x C-b") 'ido-switch-buffer)
(global-set-key (kbd "C-x C-c") 'ido-switch-buffer)
(global-set-key (kbd "C-x B") 'ibuffer)
</src>

Yes, you see that I've rebound =C-x C-c= to switching buffers.  That key is
really easy to use and I don't think that =M-x kill-emacs= deserves it.  Keys
that are so easy to use should be kept for frequent actions, and quiting
emacs is a once-a-day to once-a-month action here.  And you can still quit
from the window manager button or from the menu or from =M-x=.

Also *Mac* users are not left behind, you will see some settings that either
are adapted to the system (like choosing another *font*, keep displaying the
=menu-bar= or not installing the darkish =tango-color-mode= on this system,
where it renders poorly in my opinion), as you can see here:

<src lang="emacs-lisp">
(if (string-match "apple-darwin" system-configuration)
    (set-face-font 'default "Monaco-13")
  (set-frame-font "Monospace-10"))

(when (string-match "apple-darwin" system-configuration)
  (setq mac-allow-anti-aliasing t)
  (setq mac-command-modifier 'meta)
  (setq mac-option-modifier 'none))
</src>

So all in all, I don't expect this =emacs-kicker= to please everyone, but I
expect it to be simple and rich enough (thanks to [[https://github.com/dimitri/el-get][el-get]]), and it should be
a good *kick start* that's easy to adapt.

If you want to try it without installing it it's very easy to do so.  Just
clone the =git= repository then start an =Emacs= that will use this.  For
example that could be, using the excellent [[http://emacsformacosx.com/][Emacs For MacOSX]]:

<src>
 $ /Applications/Emacs.app/Contents/MacOS/Emacs -Q -l init.el 
</src>

I hope some readers will find it useful! :)
