#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title  Prepared Statements and pgbouncer
#date   20090514
#tags   PostgreSQL release preprepare

<class name="hack"> </class>

On the performance mailing list, a recent [[http://archives.postgresql.org/pgsql-performance/2009-05/msg00026.php][thread]] drew my attention. It
devired to be about using a connection pool software and prepared statements
in order to increase scalability of PostgreSQL when confronted to a lot of
concurrent clients all doing simple =select= queries. The advantage of the
*pooler* is to reduce the number of *backends* needed to serve the queries, thus
reducing PostgreSQL internal bookkeeping. Of course, my choice of software
here is clear: [[https://developer.skype.com/SkypeGarage/DbProjects/PgBouncer][PgBouncer]] is an excellent top grade solution, performs real
well (it won't parse queries), reliable, flexible.

The problem is that while conbining =pgbouncer= and [[http://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/static/sql-prepare.html][prepared statements]] is
possible, it requires the application to check at connection time if the
statements it's interrested in are already prepared. This can be done by a
simple catalog query of this kind:

<src lang="sql">
  SELECT name
    FROM pg_prepared_statements 
   WHERE name IN ('my', 'prepared', 'statements');
</src>

Well, this is simple but requires to add some application logic. What would
be great would be to only have to =EXECUTE my_statement(x, y, z)= and never
bother if the =backend= connection is a fresh new one or an existing one, as
to avoid having to check if the application should =prepare=.

The [[http://preprepare.projects.postgresql.org/][preprepare]] pgfoundry project is all about this: it comes with a
=prepare_all()= function which will take all statements present in a given
table (=SET preprepare.relation TO 'schema.the_table';=) and prepare them for
you. If you now tell =pgbouncer= to please call the function at =backend=
creation time, you're done (see =connect_query=).

There's even a detailed [[http://preprepare.projects.postgresql.org/README.html][README]] file, but no release yet (check out the code
in the [[http://cvs.pgfoundry.org/cgi-bin/cvsweb.cgi/preprepare/preprepare/][CVS]], =pgfoundry= project page has [[http://pgfoundry.org/scm/?group_id=1000442][clear instruction]] about how to do so.
