#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title  Preparing for PGCON
#date   20110512-10:30
#tags   PostgreSQL pgcon Extensions

* Preparing for PGCON

It's this time of the year again, the main international
[[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/][PostgreSQL Conference]] is next week in Ottawa, Canada.  If previous years are
any indication, this will be great event where to meet with a lot of the
members of your community.  The core team will be there, developers will be
there, and we will meet with users and their challenging use cases.

This is a very good time to review both what you did in the project those
last 12 months, and what you plan to do next year.  To help with that,
several *meeting* events are organized.  They're like a whole-day round table
with a kind of an agenda, with a limited number of invited people in, and
very intense on-topic discussions about how to organize ourselves for
another great year of innovation in PostgreSQL.

Then we have two days full of talks where I usually learn some new aspect of
the project or of the product, and where ideas tend to just pop-up in a
continuous race.  Being away from home and with people you see only once a
year (some of them more than that of course, hi European fellows!) seems to
allow for some broader thinking.

The talks I want to go to include
[[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/events/361.en.html][Database Scalability Patterns: Sharding for Unlimited Growth]] by
[[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/speakers/20.en.html][Robert Treat]], [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/events/366.en.html][Maintaining Terabytes]] by [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/speakers/112.en.html][Selena Deckelmann]], [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/events/307.en.html][NTT’s Case Report]]
by [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/speakers/192.en.html][Tetsuo Sakata]], [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/events/350.en.html][Hacking the Query Planner]] by [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/speakers/202.en.html][Tom Lane]].  That's for a first
day, right?

Then, on the second day, I notice [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/events/311.en.html][Range Types]] by [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/speakers/83.en.html][Jeff Davis]],
[[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/events/309.en.html][SP-GiST - a new indexing infrastructure for PostgreSQL]] by [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/speakers/29.en.html][Oleg]] and [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/speakers/33.en.html][Teodor]],
[[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/events/337.en.html][The Write Stuff]] by [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/speakers/110.en.html][Greg Smith]] (a colleague at [[http://www.2ndquadrant.fr/][2ndQuadrant]]).

I will miss [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/events/333.en.html][Serializable Snapshot Isolation in Postgres]] by [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/speakers/113.en.html][Kevin Grittner]]
and [[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/speakers/197.en.html][Dan Ports]], unfortunately, because I'll be talking about
[[http://www.pgcon.org/2011/schedule/events/280.en.html][Extensions Development]] at the same time.

Well of course this list is just a first selection, hallway tracks are often
what guides me through talks or make me skip some.

See you there!
