#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title  el-get news
#date   20100826-16:30
#tags   Emacs el-get

* el-get news

I've been receiving some requests for [[http://www.emacswiki.org/emacs/el-get.el][el-get]], some of them even included a
patch. So now there's support for =bzr=, =CSV= and =http-tar=, augmenting the
existing support for =git=, =git-svn=, =apt-get=, =fink= and =ELPA= formats.

Also, as the =install= and even the =build= are completely *asynchronous* —
there's a pending bugfix for the building, which is now using
[[http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/elisp/html_node/Asynchronous-Processes.html][start-process-shell-command]]. The advantage of doing so is that you're free
to use Emacs as usual while =el-get= is having your piece of =elisp= code
compiled, which can take time.

The drawback is that it's uneasy to to do the associated setup at the right
time without support from =el-get=, so you have the new option =:after= which
takes a =functionp= object: please consider using that to give your own
special setup for the external emacs bits and pieces you're using.

Let's see some examples of the new features:

<src lang="emacs-lisp">
  (:name xml-rpc-el
	 :type bzr
	 :url "lp:xml-rpc-el")

  (:name haskell-mode
	 :type http-tar
	 :options ("xzf")
	 :url "http://projects.haskell.org/haskellmode-emacs/haskell-mode-2.8.0.tar.gz"
	 :load "haskell-site-file.el"
	 :after (lambda ()
		  (add-hook 'haskell-mode-hook 'turn-on-haskell-doc-mode)
		  (add-hook 'haskell-mode-hook 'turn-on-haskell-indentation)))

  (:name auctex
	 :type cvs
	 :module "auctex"
	 :url ":pserver:anonymous@cvs.sv.gnu.org:/sources/auctex"
	 :build ("./autogen.sh" "./configure" "make")
	 :load  ("auctex.el" "preview/preview-latex.el")
	 :info "doc")
</src>

As you can see, there are also the new options =:module= (only used by =CVS= so
far) and =:options= (only used by =http-tar= so far). With this later method,
the =:options= key allows you to have support for virtually any kind of =tar=
compression (=.tar.bz2=, etc). 

The =CVS= support currently does not include authentication against the
anonymous =pserver=, because the only repository I've been asked support for
isn't using that, and the couple of servers that I know of are either
wanting no password at the prompt, or a dummy one. That's for another day,
if needed at all.

That pushes the little local hack to more than a thousand lines of =elisp=
code, and the next steps include proposing it to [[http://tromey.com/elpa/][ELPA]] so that getting to use
it is easier than ever. You'd just have to choose whether to install =ELPA=
from =el-get= or the other way around.
