#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title /dev/dim
#date 20081205
#desc The new publication

* Dim's place on the internet

I used to use many different tools to publish a web site. This introduction
about my current website is more a rante than anything else, really. You
certainly should skip it entirely and go check either the blog or the more
static resources, often tied to projects.

** A rant about internet publishing softwares

So it's already 2008, and very soon it'll be 2009. In fact, we've never been
this near to be in year 2009. One could think that publishing material on
the internet has came easy now. Well, it depends a lot on what you call
easy.

When what you call *easy* is the following, you're in trouble:

 - editing plain text with your usual =$EDITOR=
 - publishing static web pages, the though is that there will be more reads
   than writes, or you wouldn't be *publishing* whatever it is you are
   publishing, so please let be generate **static** content
 - having a nice but rich syntax, where simple things are simple and complex
   ones possible.

What I've been using so far to achieve previous goals where, well, hand
written software in dynamic php (fail) then in python, both using the same
very personal syntax and menu system; then a [[http://docutils.sf.net/][docutils]] based solution named
[[http://www.voidspace.org.uk/python/rest2web/][rest2web]], and now that I'm back to trying to use [[http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/][GNU Emacs]] for more than
plain editing, I'm trying the [[http://mwolson.org/projects/EmacsMuse.html][Emacs Muse]] publication system.

The python docutils toolset seems nice at the beginning, but I kept hitting
errors I was left unable to fix, even though I'm somewhat used to hack my
way around free software. Problems tied to encodings, where even using
=--debug= options did not give any clue. I'd prefer to forget about it.

What is this rant about already? Oh well, I can't believe how hard it is
today to find a good and simple web publishing solution for =$EDITOR= kind of
users, the ones building the internet in some ways. I really hope [[http://mwolson.org/projects/EmacsMuse.html][Emacs Muse]]
to be this one.

The usual problem with publishing tools is the early success. It seems so
easy, albeit admitidly demanding technical-fu (which means, as a geek, you
like it). Then the site online, you made the nice =CSS= for it, all is
good. Then you forget about it, work on some real projects instead, and some
weeks or months later you want to publish some content about those projects
you've been working on. And you just *can* **not** ***figure out*** how to achieve this
simple step.

Or the tool suite is falling on you without any useful error messages.

I've been pointed to [[http://ikiwiki.info/][Ikiwiki]], but as much as I like palyndroms, [[http://mwolson.org/projects/EmacsMuse.html][Emacs Muse]]
seemed much more attractive a project. Having all working from my editor of
choice is a nice idea, and I'm getting fond of [[http://www.gnu.org/software/emacs/manual/elisp.html][Emacs Lisp]]. More as a
programming environment (in this highly dynamic editor) than as a language,
maybe. Not sure yet. It's just so fun to hack ones way into =emacs= with this
tool!

So, Internet is not ready for geeks to *easily* publish their rants, or they
have to sacrifice to the dynamic web hosting facilities mode. No Thanks.

** Projects having some dedicated place here

And now to some interresting things, at least for some of the audience. Or
so I hope...

*** pgloader, the PostgreSQL parallel ETL

blah

*** prefix search indexing, a PostgreSQL GiST module

blah

*** SkyTools: Londiste & PGQ for PostgreSQL replication

blah

*** ClusterSSH Emacs Lisp implementation, cssh.el

blah

** /dim/blog

At long last! And with a standard compliant feed! Yeah. [[http://blog.tapoueh.org][Check it out!]]
