#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title  Muse setup revised
#date   20110705-19:55
#tags   Emacs Muse

Most of you are probably reading my posts directly in their =RSS= reader tools
(mine is [[http://www.gnus.org/][gnus]] thanks to the [[http://gwene.org/][Gwene]] service), so you probably missed it, but I
just *pushed* a whole new version of [[http://tapoueh.org][my website]], still using [[https://github.com/alexott/muse][Emacs Muse]] as the
engine.

My setup is tentatively called [[../../../tapoueh.el.html][tapoueh.el]] and browsable online.  It consists
of some tweaks on top of Muse, so that I can enjoy [[../../../tags/index.html][tags]] and proper [[../../../rss/][rss]]
support.  By *proper*, I mean that I want to be able to produce as many *topic*
=RSS= *feeds* from a single *blog*, and thanks to the *tags* support that's now what
I have.

The =RSS= handling and the tagging system are adhoc code, and this very
article begins like this:

<src lang="muse">
#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title  Muse setup revised
#date   20110705-19:55
#tags   Emacs Muse
</src>

All the information for the site navigation are taken from there, and at
long last the =RSS= I publish now contains proper =URLs= without abusing
[[../../../blog.dim.html][anchors]], as in the previous link which is a compatibility page in case you
had some bookmarks.  The compat only works with javascript (did you know
that *anchors* are not part of the =URL= that is sent to the server, so that you
can't apply =RedirectMatch= or other tweaks?), but all it needs is *2 lines of
code*, so I guess that's not so bad.

<src lang="javascript">
var anchor = window.location.hash;
document.location.href=document.getElementById(anchor).href;
</src>

I hope you like the new setup as much as I do, even if I'm left with some
debugging to do.  That's the price to pay for doing it yourself I guess.
But I still don't know of a ready to use solution (as in *off the shelf*) that
meet my criteria for web publishing.  More on that topic another time.
