#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title  Back from CHAR(10)
#date   20100705-09:30
#tags   PostgreSQL Conferences pgcon

It surely does not feel like a full month and some more went by since we
were enjoying [[http://www.pgcon.org/2010/][PGCon 2010]], but in fact it was already the time for
[[http://char10.org/talk-schedule][CHAR(10)]]. The venue was most excellent, as Oxford is a very beautiful
city. Also, the college was like a city in the city, and having the
accomodation all in there really smoothed it all.

On a more technical viewpoint, the [[http://char10.org/talk-schedule][range of topics]] we talked about and the
even broader one in the *"Hall Track"* make my mind full of ideas, again. So
I'm preparing a quite lengthy article to summarise or present all those
ideas, and I think a post series should cover the points in there. When
trying to label things, it appears that my current obsessions are mainly
about *PostgreSQL in the Cloud* and *Further Optimising PostgreSQL*, so that's
what I'll be talking about those next days.

Meanwhile I'm going to search for existing solutions on how to use the
[[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Paxos_algorithm][Paxos algorithm]] to generate a reliable distributed sequence, using [[http://libpaxos.sourceforge.net/][libpaxos]]
for example. The goal would be to see if it's feasible to have a way to
offer some global =XID= from a network of servers in a distributed fashion,
ideally in such a way that new members can join in at any point, and of
course that losing a member does not cause downtime for the online ones. It
sounds like this problem has been extensively researched and is solved,
either by the *Global Communication Systems* or the underlying
algorithms. Given the current buy-in lack of our community for =GCS= my guess
is that bypassing them would be a pretty good move, even if that mean
implementing a limited form of =GCS= ourselves.
