#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title  Logs analysis
#date   20100713-14:15
#tags   PostgreSQL

* Logs analysis

Nowadays to analyze logs and provide insights, the more common tool to use
is [[http://pgfouine.projects.postgresql.org/][pgfouine]], which does an excellent job. But there has been some
improvements in logs capabilities that we're not benefiting from yet, and
I'm thinking about the =CSV= log format.

So the idea would be to turn *pgfouine* into a set of =SQL= queries against the
logs themselves once imported into the database. Wait. What about having our
next PostgreSQL version, which is meant (I believe) to include CSV support
in *SQL/MED*, to directly expose its logs as a system view?

A good thing would be to expose that as a ddl-partitioned table following
the log rotation scheme as setup in =postgresql.conf=, or maybe given in some
sort of a setup, in order to support =logrotate= users. At least some
facilities to do that would be welcome, and I'm not sure plain *SQL/MED* is
that when it comes to *source* partitioning.

Then all that remains to be done is a set of =SQL= queries and some static or
dynamic application to derive reports from there.

This is yet again an idea I have in mind but don't have currently time to
explore myself, so I talk about it here in the hope that others will share
the interest. Of course, now that I work at [[http://2ndQuadrant.com][2ndQuadrant]], you can make it so
that we consider the idea in more details, up to implementing and
contributing it!
