#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title  Resuming work on Extensions, first little step
#date   20101007-17:15
#tags   PostgreSQL Extensions

<class name="hack"> </class>

Yeah I'm back on working on my part of the extension thing in [[http://www.postgresql.org/][PostgreSQL]].

First step is a little one, but as it has public consequences, I figured I'd
talk about it already. I've just refreshed my =git= repository to follow the
new =master= one, and you can see that here
[[http://git.postgresql.org/gitweb?p=postgresql-extension.git;a=commitdiff;h=9a88e9de246218e93c04b6b97e1ef61d97925430]].

It's been easier than I feared, mainly:

<src>
$ git --no-pager diff master..extension
$ git --no-pager format-patch master..extension
$ cp 0001-First-stab-at-writing-pg_execute_from_file-function.patch ..
$ git checkout master
$ git pull -f pgmaster
$ git reset --hard pgmaster/master
$ git checkout extension
$ git reset --hard master
$ git am -s ../0001-First-stab-at-writing-pg_execute_from_file-function.edit.patch 
$ git status
$ git log --short | head
$ git log -n2 --oneline
$ git push -f
</src>

So that's still more steps that one want to call dead simple, but still. The
=format-patch= command is to save my work away (all patches that are in the
*extension* branch but not in the *master* — well that was only one of them
here). Then, as the master repository =URL= didn't change, I can simply =pull=
the changes in. Of course I had a nice message *warning: no common commits*.

Once pulled, I trashed my local copy and replaced it with the new official
one, that's =git reset --hard pgmaster/master=, then in the *extension* branch I
could trash it and have it linked to the local =master= again.

Of course, the =git am= method wouldn't apply my patch as-is, there was some
underlying changes in the source files, the identification tag changed from
=$PostgreSQL$= to, e.g., =src/backend/utils/adt/genfile.c=, and I had to cope
with that. Maybe there's some tool (=git am -3= ?) to do it automatically, I
just copy edited the =.patch= file.

Lastly, it's all about checking the result and publishing the result. This
last line is =git push -f= and is when I just trashed and replaced my
[[http://git.postgresql.org/gitweb?p=postgresql-extension.git;a=summary][postgresql-extension]] community repository. I don't think anybody was
following it, but should it be the case, you will have to *reinit* your copy.

More blog posts to come about extensions, as I arranged to have some real
time to devote on the topic. At least I was able to arrange things so that I
can work on the subject for real, and the first thing I did, the very night
before it was meant to begin, is catch a *tonsillitis*. Lost about a week, not
the project! Stay tuned!
