#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title el-get.el
#date 20110704
#desc Tapoueh.org Inc. Projects

Of course, my emacs setup is managed in a private =git= repository. Some
people on =#emacs= are using [[http://www.kernel.org/pub/software/scm/git/docs/git-submodule.html][git submodules]] (or was it straight *import*) for
managing external repositories in there, but all I can say is that I frown
on this idea. I want an easy canonical list of packages I depend on to run
emacs, and I want this documentation to be usable as-is. Enters [[http://www.emacswiki.org/emacs/el-get.el][el-get]]!

<src lang="emacs-lisp">
(setq el-get-sources
      '((:name bbdb
	       :type git
	       :url "git://github.com/barak/BBDB.git"
	       :load-path ("./lisp" "./bits")
	       :info "texinfo"
	       :build ("./configure" "make"))
	
	(:name magit
	       :type git
	       :url "http://github.com/philjackson/magit.git"
	       :info "."
	       :build ("./autogen.sh" "./configure" "make"))
	
	(:name vkill
	       :type http
	       :url "http://www.splode.com/~friedman/software/emacs-lisp/src/vkill.el"
	       :features vkill)
	
	(:name yasnippet
	       :type git-svn
	       :url "http://yasnippet.googlecode.com/svn/trunk/")
	
	(:name asciidoc         :type elpa)
	(:name dictionary-el    :type apt-get)
	(:name emacs-goodies-el :type apt-get)))

(el-get)
</src>

So now you have a pretty good documentation of the packages you want
installed, where to get them, and how to install them. For the *advanced*
methods (such as =elpa= or =apt-get=), you basically just need the package
name. When relying on a bare =git= repository, you need to give some more
information, such as the =URL= to *clone* and the =build= steps if any. Then also
what *features* to =require= and maybe where to find the *texinfo* documentation
of the package, for automatic inclusion into your local *Info* menu.

The good news is that not only you now have a solid readable description of
all that in a central place, but this very description is all =(el-get)= needs
to do its magic. This command will check that each and every package is
installed on your system (in =el-get-dir=) and if that's not the case, it will
actually install it. Then, it will =init= the packages: that means caring
about the =load-path=, the =Info-directory-list= (and *dir* texinfo menu building)
the *loading* of the =emacs-lisp= files, and finally it will =require= the
*features*.
