#author Dimitri Fontaine
#title  Improving ~/.mailrc usage
#date   20090907-01:29
#tags   Emacs prefix

So I've been adviced to use =~/.mailrc= for keeping a basic address book in
Emacs, for use within =gnus= for example. I had to resort to the manual to
find out how to use the file aliases when I need them, that is when
composing a mail. For the record, here's what I had to do:

<src lang="emacs-lisp">
;; mails and aliases
(add-hook 'mail-mode-hook 'mail-abbrevs-setup)
(global-set-key (kbd "C-c @") 'mail-abbrev-insert-alias)
</src>

That means I prefer hitting =C-c @=, then typing the alias in the minibuffer
(with completion) and there after see the full mail address in my
=message-mode= buffer. This looks like it'll change over time, but rather than
searching how to have a nice inline alias completion (=M-tab= maybe, but
already used by the *window manager*), I've tackled the problem of maintaining
the ~/.mailrc file.

Lazy as I am (or I wouldn't be using Emacs this much), having to manually
select the email region in the buffer, open or switch to the =mailrc= buffer
then paste my new entry, not forgetting to format it with =alias foo= prefix
and checking for alias usage while doing so didn't strike me as
appealing. Oh and don't forget to add quote where they belong, too.

Too much work that I wanted to automate. Here we go:

<src lang="emacs-lisp">
;; automate adding mail at point to ~/.mailrc
(defun dim:mailrc-add-entry (alias)
  "read email at point"
  (interactive "Malias: ")
  (let ((address (thing-at-point 'email-address))
	(buffer (find-file-noselect mail-personal-alias-file t)))
    (when address
      (with-current-buffer buffer
	;; we don't support updating existing alias in the file
	(save-excursion
	  (goto-char (point-min))
	  (if (search-forward (concat "alias " alias) nil t)
	      (error "Alias %s is already present in .mailrc" alias)))

	(save-current-buffer
	  (save-excursion
	    (goto-char (point-max))
	    (insert (format "\nalias %s \"%s <%s>\"" alias (cdr address) (car address)))))))))

(global-set-key (kbd "C-c C-@") 'dim:mailrc-add-entry)
</src>

Quite there, you'll notice that I'm using =thing-at-point 'email-address=, and
maybe you already know that =emacs23= does not provide this. It provides
=thing-at-point 'email= which will ignore real name and all. For example,
given a point somewhere inside the right part of =John Doe
<johndoe@email.tld>= the ='email= variant of =thing-at-point= will return
=johndoe@email.tld=. In words of one syllabe: not what I want.

So after searching around for a solution, I saw =mail-header-parse-address=
from the API oriented =mail-parse= librairy, and finaly came up with this dead simple
solution which works fine enough for me:

<src lang="emacs-lisp">
(require 'mail-parse)

(defun thing-at-point-bounds-of-email-address ()
  "return a cons of begin and end position of email address at point, including full name"
  (save-excursion
    (let* ((search-point (point))
	   (start (re-search-backward "[:,]" (line-beginning-position) 'move))
	   (dummy (goto-char search-point))
	   (end   (re-search-forward  "[:,]" (line-end-position) t)))
      (setq start (if start (+ 1 start)
		    (line-beginning-position)))
      (unless end (setq end (line-end-position)))
      (cons start end))))

(defun thing-at-point-email-address ()
  "return full email address at point"
  (let* ((bounds (thing-at-point-bounds-of-email-address))
	 (email-address-text
	  (when bounds (buffer-substring-no-properties (car bounds) (cdr bounds)))))
    (mail-header-parse-address email-address-text)))

(put 'email-address 'bounds-of-thing-at-point 'thing-at-point-bounds-of-email-address)
(put 'email-address 'thing-at-point 'thing-at-point-email-address)
</src>

Now, when I receive a mail and want to store an alias for it, I simply place
point somewhere in the mail then hit =C-c C-@=, and *voilà* my =~/.mailrc= is
uptodate.

Hope it'll be useful for someone else, but at least I'm keeping annotated
history of the files :)
